---
title: Reinforcing Computing Fundamentals
date: 2021-03-19
categories: [Spotlight]
tags: [books, learning]
description: Bookmarking a few texts on computing fundamentals that I aim to read in the near future.
---

As someone who didn't formally study computing in any capacity, I find that I
gravitate towards material that reinforces fundamental concepts. I *do* have
some education background, and I think learning how a human learns, and by
extension, how to approach teaching concepts to a human, have firmly entrenched
the idea that concepts help build on each other to improve your understanding of
complex concepts. That summarizes down to the idea that knowing fundamentals
helps learn more complex concepts. Or something to that extent, since I'm
wanting to formally phrase my line of thought here in this post.

With that in mind, I've a few texts that have been sitting in my [stack of
sticky notes](https://keep.google.com/) that I'd like to share on this blog.
This shares the double purpose of making it publicly available to readers who
may not have come across these texts, and also serves as a bookmark so that I
can effectively remove them from my sticky note backlog while managing to keep
track of the texts.

I make no comment as to the validity of the texts, but overall the comments on
Hacker News in response to their posting, as well as their reviews, all seem
favorable. The verbiage of some reviewers also seems almost "attached", in that
readers of these texts have strong feelings towards the content and its
contribution to their personal successes. 

[How to Design Programs by by Matthias Felleisen, Robert Bruce Findler, Matthew
Flatt, Shriram Krishnamurthi](https://htdp.org/2018-01-06/Book/). This is a text
that's particularly interesting to me because, just having read a few pages, it
focuses on meeting the reader where they are. A particularly intriguing
commenter mentioned a similar course on the subject called [Systematic Program
Design](https://learning.edx.org/course/course-v1:UBCx+SPD1x+2T2016/home)
available on EdX. [Hacker News
Discussions](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=26493990)

[Operating Systems: Three Easy Pieces Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau and Andrea C.
Arpaci-Dusseau (University of
Wisconsin-Madison)](https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/) is a text focusing
on core operator system concepts which has always been an interesting topic.
[Hacker News Discussion](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=26051386)

[The Mediocre Programmer by Craig
Maloney](http://themediocreprogrammer.com/build/html/the_mediocre_programmer.html)is
a text on managing your programming skill set. As someone who was largely
formally educated in systems and computing by mentorship, the internet, and
tinkering, this text is on my radar as it poses to help bridge the gap between
your perception of your technical knowledge and skills, and the perceived goal
(i.e. what you want to achieve in computing). That's just from a skim of the
text. [Hacker New Discussion](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=26051600).

That's it! Three less sticky notes on the stack. And as an aside, for whatever
reason I kept wanting to type "Hackery News". That's a great name. Ycombinator
should pick that up.
