---
title: 'To Android or To ChromeOS!?'
publishDate: 2021-04-13
categories: [Thoughts]
tags: [android, chromeos, samsung, hp, lenovo, chromebook]
description: 'Is a ChromeOS based tablet in my future?'
---


I've been watching the development of ChromeOS and the Chromebook since its
early days. I'm a fan of squeezing as much as possible out of low-end and
outdated machines, and Chromebooks have targeted exactly that market.

![hpchromebook14](/images/hp-chromebook-14.png)

I initially bought into the Chromebook ecosystem by purchasing an early
generation of the current [HP Chromebook
14](https://www.hp.com/us-en/shop/mdp/laptops/hp-chromebook-clamshell-3074457345617477171--1#!&tab=features).
If I remember correctly, this was one of the few readily-available machines that
offered 4GB of memory and screen size larger than 13" (which was a feature for
me at that point). It also had a SIM slot and came with a SIM card with 200MB of
monthly data free for life (but we'll see how that holds up over time... if I
can find the card).

The device itself was incredibly well made and had a very sleek white shell. The
limiting factor at the time was ChromeOS. It was more than fine for a simple
browser-driven workflows, or workflows that worked nicely using
[CroSH](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/docs/+/master/developer_mode.md),
but I remember running into a few issues connecting to WIFI at the workplace due
to Enterprise WIFI sign on procedures (that I can't detail because I can't
remember). I don't remember what happened to that machine, but I'm sure it would
have done just well these days.

## Modern Day Options

These days, we've got quite a bit more in the way of options. The Chromebook
market has exploded with tons of devices that fit the various needs of computer
users. But in addition, we've got a wealth of options in the Tablet space as
well, including the likes of the [iPad
Pro](https://www.apple.com/ipad-pro/)running iOS, or the [Microsoft
Surface](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/surface) running full blown Windows 10.
These are powerful machines capable of being full-blown workstation replacements
(although the Surface tablet isn't probably shooting for that space) as well as
fully mobile platforms so that you can be productive anywhere. 

This in mind, I have no interest in being in the "mobile powerhouse" space today
(though I can't speak for future me). What I have been on the fence about is
obtaining some form of a lightweight machine that is easy to travel (here,
meaning travel in a backpack as I go to visit family) and allows me to remain
relatively productive. Sure, devices of any size can be made to fit in an
appropriate backpack, but ultimately I want a machine that isn't my main
workstation so that I don't run the risk of damaging the machine while out and
about. 

## The Current State of the World

I have to be somewhat realistic about what I mean regarding my desire to be
"productive" while on the go. At face value, it's fair to say that I'm unlikely
to be launching Android Studio to work on my latest
[Flutter](https://flutter.dev/) experiments while I'm out and about.
Productivity on the go might, however, include some ebook reading, maybe some
blog writing, general browsing of websites and media consumption (Youtube), and
maybe remotely accessing a machine or two to tinker around. Accessing services
like Netflix is a given.

If I can do anything further, such as development tasks, it would be a bonus
(and potentially achievable with the magic that is [VSCode
Server](https://github.com/cdr/code-server)), but in no way should it be the
defining factor. 

That confirms for me that the device should perform exceptionally well for those
tasks it will be used for most often. Today, that's the [Samsung Galaxy Tab
S5E](https://www.samsung.com/us/mobile/tablets/galaxy-tab-s/galaxy-tab-s5e-10-5-2019-wi-fi-sm-t720nzkaxar/).

![galaxytabs5e](/images/galaxy-tab-s5e.jpg)

The device is incredibly lightweight without its case, has a phenomenal screen
and battery life, and is the perfect screen size for a portable machine to toss
into a backpack. It also has an optional
[keyboard](https://www.samsung.com/us/mobile/mobile-accessories/tablets/galaxy-tab-s5e-book-cover-keyboard-ej-ft720ubeguj/)
that can be purchased for an insanely expensive price of $129.99 (so needless to
say, I don't have it) turning it into a more productive 2-in-1 machine if you
need it. And finally, it includes access to [Samsung
Dex](https://www.samsung.com/us/explore/dex/), which I actually think is quite
nice for the same use cases a Chromebook fits in well. The tablet also allows
you to enable Dex mode while not plugged into a display, turning the machine
into a slightly-better multitasker. That, combined with the
recently-not-updated-on-the-Play-store [Termux](https://termux.com/) app makes
this device an excellent machine for fitting as many of the described use cases
so far.

But are there better options these days?

## The Landscape

Pure-linux devices like the [PineTab](https://www.pine64.org/pinetab/) are out
for me as I'm not much of an early adopter and the device is in very-early
stages of development in my book. With that said, ChromeOS has native support
for Linux and Android workflows these days, which makes it an excellent platform
to fit this mobile-friendly device in my lineup. So what options are
interesting?

The most tempting has been the [Lenovo Chromebook
Duet](https://www.lenovo.com/us/en/laptops/lenovo/student-chromebooks/Lenovo-CT-X636/p/ZZICZCTCT1X).

![lenovoduet](/images/lenovo-chromebook-duet.jpg)

I've been tempted to pick one up multiple times because the device just seems to
fit the mold described above incredibly well! It's boasts a Surface-like
experience without the Windows 10, and has native support for Android apps and
linux apps. Even if I had no Linux apps available, the embedded browser shell
would be sufficient to replace the Termux-based use-cases I have on my current
Samsung tablet, and it's supported out of the box. 

What holds me back from this device is the support for external displays. It has
had some issues with regards to having full-resolution support on external
displays powered via USB-C, but some work arounds exist as of this writing. The
writers at
[ChromeUnboxed.com](https://chromeunboxed.com/lenovo-chromebook-duet-display-output-productive)
have better coverage of that situation, so I'll simply link there for folks who
want to chase that issue down. 

In addition, I've got a bit of a question of logistic with regards to these
tablet-like devices with soft keyboard covers: how do they play out in "lay-down
computing"? If I'm laying on the couch or in bed trying to get some work done,
or patch some servers - how comfortable are these setups to work with? My
current workstation is a 15" Macbook Pro, and the fact that the display hinge
doesn't open past, maybe... a 135 degree angle is somewhat frustrating when it
comes to viewing angles while laying down. That device also has weight issues
that make supporting it while in this position difficult to do while maintaining
a decent typing and trackpad experience.

That leads to potential challengers in the space, such as the [HP Chromebook
X2](https://www.hp.com/us-en/shop/tech-takes/hp-chromebook-x2-complete-review)
which is a detachable device that follows a similar form-factor as the Lenovo
Duet.

This gives me a more rigid experience when working with the device in laptop
mode. The challenge I have here is still the same as describe with the Macbook -
I'm limited on the overall viewing angle of the screen due to the way it "docks"
to the keyboard, which means that it will never be perfect for all viewing
needs.

So where does that leave me?

Well it leaves me considering devices with 360 degree (or at least 180 degree)
hinges such as the [HP Chromebook
x360](https://www.hp.com/us-en/shop/mdp/laptops/hp-chromebook-x360-3074457345617477172--1/).
But these devices aren't without their own problems. For example, the HP
Chromebook x360 has a weight of 3.29 pounds! That's massive, compared to the
~0.9 pound weight of the Samsung Galaxy Tab S5e. Let alone the overall bulk
because the keyboard is firmly fixed to the device. So while these 180/360
degree hinged devices seem somewhat promising and worth considering, ultimately
they have facets of them that cause them to be less valuable in the space that
this device will fill in my computing.

Maybe I'm being overly critical because I currently have a functional device
with a great screen that fits about 95% of what I would want to do it with it.
In all honesty, picking the Samsung Galaxy Tab S5e was a hard enough choice in
itself - the Android tablet ecosystem is also somewhat lacking in viable
options, bringing even more affirmation that a ChromeOS-based device would fill
that void nicely. At the time that I received the Samsung, however, we didn't
have the tablet-style devices we have today. 

Maybe we'll see what devices become available as more time passes. By the time
this Samsung Tablet reaches its end-of-life, perhaps the perfect replacement
will present itself. With the speed of innovation in ChromeOS-based devices
these days, I would not be surprised if we see perfect mobile-friendly options
become available built on ChromeOS. Or maybe we'll become an early adopter of a
[FuschiaOS](https://fuchsia.dev/)-based device!
