---
title: There and Back Again - On Knowledge Management
publishDate: 2021-03-31
categories: [Thoughts]
tags: [learning, knowledge-base]
description: Dumping all of the knowledge management techniques I committed to in 2019.
---

I [wrote](/posts/2019/10/24/solving-the-knowledge-base-problem/) about my
approach to knowledge management in 2019. I had switched into a new role with
more project-based responsibilities, and had needed to make sure to have
consistent knowledge transfers day over day.

At the time, I had landed on a few tools that I had committed to working with
for a period of time, and those were effective. I had landed on Emacs [Org
Mode](https://orgmode.org/) for managing todo lists, and used
[Typora](https://www.typora.io/) for anything related to markdown.

The challenges I still had at the time were related to the idea of actually
learning the content, or more specifically, serializing that knowledge in a way
that's easy to consume when I need it. This is the idea of a "knowledge base",
or a single place where all my knowledge lands that's easily searchable. I used
Org Mode for this to a certain extent as well, as I didn't want to split my
attention to multiple tools.

Unfortunately, all of those efforts fell by the way side after I went on a short
vacation and returned with recollection of how to navigate my Org Mode notes.
Sure, this is a personal issue, but I was unable to get to return and be
productive quickly. I had even spent time generating a cheatsheet of common
workflows that I used in Org Mode, and that didn't help with ramping back up to
a productive workflow. 

Ultimately, I pitched Org Mode for knowledge and todo-list management. In the
time after, I tried several tools
([Zettlr](https://www.zettlr.com/),[Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) ) with (at
most) partial success in having them stick or be effective in my workflow. The
effort of curating your notes just made keeping notes tedious, and I do believe
that - at least to a certain extent - anything that's more significant than a
scratchpad needs some degree of "curation" to be valuable. Spending time
curating the content manually is time not spent working on projects or actively
learning things.

These days, I have a simple but less reliable approach. I generally start up a
scratchpad document when working on a given project. That's it. I don't really
expect that scratchpad to survive over time or be curated. It's merely a place
for me to dump snippets of code, console output, logs, and jot down random
thoughts as they come up. I'll also leave my self little tidbits there for when
I inevitably walk out of the office at the end of the day, and come back the
next morning. 

For more involved projects, I tend to be more diligent with my end-of-day notes
so that I can have a running start when I resume work on that project.

Finally - I keep a log book for work projects. That's just a simple text
document that has a date stamp for each work day. I find that I keep more
verbose log entries on some days, but that's not a requirement. Some days are
very sparse. What I put into the log book just depends on how busy I was that
day.

I also have the [Analog
system](https://ugmonk.com/blogs/journal/analog-the-simplest-productivity-system)
that a friend purchased for me to try, and have been playing with managing daily
todos (both work and personal) on these tiny lists of activities to accomplish.
Some days I forget, but either way it sits on my desk and gives me the space to
organize the day if I feel like I need it. A nice side effect of these tiny
cards is that I'm not motivated to add more things to my todo list once I've
filled the card.

There's certainly room for tooling, but until I find something that truly gets
out of the way and also provides value, spending the extra cycles focusing on
the task at hand (instead of curating my personal knowledge) has been more
valuable.

Keep learning!
